hey curious minds I'm dr. Becky welcome
back to my channel and today I want to
talk about another unsolved mystery in
physics and this is all about the idea
of direct collapse black holes well the
black holes can formed by direct
collapse of matter rather than through a
supernova or something else like that so
at the end of 2017 astronomers
discovered the farthest known
supermassive black hole in the universe
it was eight hundred million times the
mass of the Sun and it was thirteen
billion light years away which is pretty
cool in itself but the problem is that
something that's thirteen billion
light-years away the light has taken 13
billion years to reach us so it means
that the object that it left 13 billion
years ago was in a universe that was
only like 700 million years old because
the universe itself is only 13.7 billion
years old and they're super massive
black hole had a mass of 800 times the
mass of the Sun like it was huge so the
question is how did the black hole grow
from you know nothing a hero after the
Big Bang when the first stars are being
formed to eight hundred million times
the mass of the Sun in only seven
hundred million years in fact less than
that because you know but at the time
the Big Bang has happened you've not
immediately got stars so say 600 million
years so this went against sort of all
our theories for how black holes grow
and how quickly they can grow as well so
there's three different ways that you
can form a black hole rate the
supernovae there's a neutron star
neutron star merger or there's this idea
of direct collapse black holes okay so
in a supernova
that's probably what most people are
familiar with right like massive star
end of life runs out of hydrogen starts
sort of runaway fusion through helium
burning and lithium burning all the way
up until he gets tired which when it
can't do anything anymore and it
explodes this huge supernova and then
whatever's left in the middle collapses
down under its own gravity into a black
hole and those are kind of like a
hundred times the mass of the Sun stars
that do that and they give you you know
they're like 10 20 solar mass black
holes at the end the less is there
down from that is that a slightly lower
mass start or something say like fifty
seventy five times the mass of the Sun
when it gets the end of its life instead
of forming a black hole it's not got
enough mass to do that so it ends up as
a neutron star which is like a star
where all the space has been squashed
out of atoms electrons have been forced
to merge of protons and you've just got
like really tightly packed neutrons in
this star if you have two of those
perhaps there was a binary star system
both of them
those stars ended their life and ended
up as neutron stars and then you could
merge them together and form a black
hole that way that's option two option
three is this idea of a direct collapse
black hole so a star perhaps can be
happily burning its fuel and all of a
sudden directly collapse into a black
hole
so the Hubble Space Telescope is
actually sort of seen this happening
there was a 25 times the mass of the Sun
star that just winked out of existence
and the idea was that it just went
directly from being a star and
collapsing into a black hole
that's unsure why it might have done
that but the idea is that it's possible
and we've seen it happen okay think
about the early universe right you had
the Big Bang it's created all of the
mass in the universe and all matter
right and it's this like soup of
hydrogen particles may be the odd helium
lithium particle whatever I'll just sort
of draw something around with Dark
Matter instead of a soup in the early
universe
you get particles that start to clump
together that becomes like an over
density and then everything's drawn to
that and you get less dense areas and so
in the end you end up sort of like
clumping up all of the gas and dark
matter into what we call these like
halos where we expect like in the center
of them
you're gonna start and forming the very
first stars in the universe and
therefore the very first galaxies and
then the very first black holes as well
so you can imagine in this sort of very
early universe the very first stars are
going to form at the center of those
over densities and then probably one of
those is gonna be massive enough to go
supernova and you're gonna end up with
the very first black hole forming around
about say like 10 times the mass of the
Sun question is how you then go from
that 10 times
the mass and the Sun all the way to 800
million times the mass of the Sun in
only the space of a couple of hundred
million years
so most black holes we think they grow
via just accretion right so they a creep
material material that is spiraling
around it will eventually sort of be
eaten by the black holes what mean by
accretion right and it usually how they
do that is they have this accretion disk
of spiraling hydrogen gas around them we
tend to be able to spot supermassive
black holes that are accreting because
that spiraling gas gets very hot because
of friction and then it also will glow
and energy given out by the supermassive
black hole also cause it to glow in
x-rays so that's how we know that black
holes grow that way because we've kind
of seen the radiation from them all
across the universe but the thing is
there's a very well-defined limit that a
black hole can actually accretor like it
can tikrit beyond a certain amount and
that is when you balance the force of
gravity that is pushing the gas inwards
towards the black hole with the force of
the radiation pressure that the lights
that the gas is emitting is pushing the
gas away from it so when you balance
those perfectly as when is the maximum
amount that you'll be able to accrete
right and so there's a very nice
equation that tells us that that
amount or the luminosity that you get
from balancing those two forces is
proportional to the mass of the black
hole that you've got so if you're gonna
start with something that's like 10
times the mass of the Sun that's not
gonna be able to accrete that much but
then as it gets bigger and bigger it can
create more and more and more the thing
is even if it accreted at that maximum
level for the entire time it would only
just be able to form an eight hundred
million times mass of the Sun
supermassive black hole right and we
also know that at least black holes in
our local universe that we have observed
do not accrete at that maximum amount
throughout their lifetime
sometimes they cannot create more than
that because that relies on the
assumption that everything is sort of
separately symmetric so there's a lot of
assumptions thrown in there but if the
geometry is just right you can exceed
that limit but only for a short space of
time because if you start to accrete
loads and loads of
then the supermassive black holes gonna
get really active start throwing off
material which then expels all the gas
that you were going to accrete anyway
far away from the black hole it like
throws it out from the black hole so the
black holes that we've observed in our
own universe they show that kind of
cycle of accretion and then stopping and
then accretion again and then stopping
and so this sort of like really
fluctuating gross pattern so if the
black holes in nearly universal like the
ones we've seen then there's no way that
you can grow them from that small to
that big that quickly the other thing
that's obviously involved here is
mergers as well so we have seen from
simulations of the early universe that a
lot of the halos of gas and dark matter
where the first stars in galaxies form
they tend to end up merging together in
the early universe because I think is a
lot denser before the universes has
expanded so people for a while saying
well you can just circumvent the whole
the black hole's can't grow that big in
that short space of time if you have a
lot of mergers the problem is the number
of mergers you would need is really
quite large and when you have that
number of mergers you know of the two
halos together you're sort of throwing
everything together but you're throwing
too much material together so you end up
with a very chaotic system and so you're
actually not likely to actually merge
the black holes they end up sort of
interacting and just sort of throwing
everything off different orbits because
of the gravitational interaction they
never end up spiraling together because
everything's just too energetic because
you've just thrown too much into the
system so you can't grow them by
accretion and you can't grow them by
mergers either which is worrying and so
theorists started saying well maybe they
don't start at the ten times the mass of
the Sun level in the early universe we
can probably make them grow to eight
hundred million times the mass of the
Sun if we start at something like a
thousand or ten thousand times the mass
of the Sun and so that's what simulation
people did for a long time is they just
said look our seed black hole mass the
mass that our black holes are going to
start off at is gonna be about a
thousand or 10,000 because that's the
only way we can
matching observations so people then
were thinking well how on earth would
you form a black hole straight away that
was a thousand times the mass of the Sun
right like starting getting towards
supermassive level and not just the
solar mass level that you start with in
terms of like you know the things that
LIGO has been detecting this 30 times
the mass of the Sun and so because
people were thinking of ways that you
could form a thousand times mass of the
Sun black hole just straight off the bat
people looked back to that third option
of forming black holes
so not supernovae not neutron star
mergers but direct collapse and so what
I talked about before that idea of
direct collapse of a star straight into
a black hole that still wouldn't be able
to give you a thousand times the mass of
the Sun black hole because you would
need some star that was a thousand times
the mass the Sun and the biggest star
we've ever seen at least in our own
galaxy is 300 ish times the mass the Sun
that's kind of an upper limit probably
lower than that but it's about 300 times
and so the idea then came about that you
would have direct collapse of the gas
cloud itself in the early universe so if
you imagine you know the two of these
halos of dark matter and gas and dust
that are gonna form the first stars and
galaxies if you got to next to each
other if you imagine that one starts to
form stars first just because it had a
denser region the gas was able to cool
and collapse under its own gravity
because you need cold gas to make stars
it has to be cold enough to sort of all
collapse in on itself if you have hot
gas then it's gonna be too energetic and
you're just gonna have particles just
flying around everywhere and nothing's
gonna want to come together collapse and
make something then hot enough to start
fusion so one of those halos ends up
collapsing and forming stars first right
what that then does to the other halo is
obviously sort of shines energy and
light and radiation from those first
stars onto the gas in the second halo
and so what that will do is heat that
gas and stop it from sort of collapsing
to form stars now the reason that a lot
of those structures don't collapse is
because you've got gravity
pushing it in on what in one sense and
then you've got the pressure from the
radiation from the photons being
produced pushing it out again that's why
the Sun doesn't collapse either its
gravity is constantly pulling it in and
the fusion of hydrogen into helium in
the center of the Sun is constantly
giving you this pressure outwards and
those forces balance so in that second
halo you've constantly got gravity
trying to collapse the whole system but
you've no radiation pressure from stars
having formed because you've got all
this radiation which is heating the gas
and stopping stars from forming so what
instead you've got is something that's
constantly wanting to collapse under its
own gravity but it's too hot to end up
forming stars and so the idea is that if
you have this big halo of stuff that's
been kept from forming stars by some
other halo that has managed to then the
idea is that could directly collapse
into a black hole and then that would be
the seed for the supermassive black
holes and presumably then that would
sort of merge with this halo and become
the center of the eventual galaxy that
would form in that halo so that's the
idea obviously proving that that is
happening is going to be incredibly
difficult right so I thought it was
recently discovered this object there
was a cr7 so what this object was was
yes when these objects found in the
really early universe so redshift 7
first 700 million years of the
universe's history and what they found
was that this object contained both in
the first generation of stars but also
emission from gas that clearly wasn't
forming stars but was being radiated by
the energy from other stars and so you
can imagine it was one of these objects
with the two halos where one was being
sort of irradiated by the energy from
stars in the early universe and
therefore could be a potential site for
these direct collapse black holes at
this pristine gas in the early universe
so we probably won't ever be able to
observe that gas actually collapsing out
cause they're coincidence if we did see
it in this one object but if we could
find more of these objects these massive
distances of 13 billion years away from
us then that would help give more
traction to this theory that all of the
supermassive black holes that we see in
the early universe have been seeded by
these direct collapse black holes at
this pristine gas in the early universe
and so if we're gonna find more of these
distant objects that I'm gonna need the
telescope that has been designed to
detect distant things and so the James
Webb Space Telescope will be crucial for
this trying to prove that in the early
universe the first supermassive black
holes are seeded by these direct
collapsed pristine gas clouds in halos
and so this is another area my started
me that is dependent on the James Webb
Space Telescope launching fine deploying
fine all the ways you can find so again
everybody needs to keep their fingers
crossed that James Webb when it actually
finally launches everything is okay
because there is a lot of areas of
astronomy that are riding on it not just
this one alright guys I hope you enjoyed
that one I learned fun making it so I
hope you had fun watching it too next
week it'll be another Sky News but until
then do not forget that comet 46 P is
gonna be in the sky sort of you know
December 14 15 16 a long way the
Geminids meteor shower so make sure you
get out there and see if you can spot
any of the meteors for the comment as
well until next week guys I'm dr. Becky
run-up
you